Initial draft of a CG/WG Staging process doc (#4)
swicg/potential-charters: stage-process.md

# CG/WG Proposal Stages

> Author: @bumblefudge, @samuelgoto

Reviewer: Thanks for the attribution, much appreciated!!

Created: 09/26/2024
Last update: 09/26/2024
Status: proposed CG charter amendment

This is a proposal to break proposals into 5 stages of maturity, with clear guidelines and requirements to advance them:

* [Stage 0](#stage0): **Exploration** of a Problem Space and/or user stories
* [Stage 1](#stage1): **Incubation** of targeted candidate solutions
* [Stage 2](#stage2): **Formalization** a preferred Proposal
* [Stage 3](#stage3): **Implementation** of the preferred Proposal
* [Stage 4](#stage4): **Publication** of a Proposed Recommendation

These stages support the W3C process.
If there is ever any question between W3C process requirements and how the groups will progress their work, the W3C process has precedent.

## Stage 0: Exploration

The purpose of Stage 0 proposals is to allow anyone to raise and explore the Problem Space without asking for permission. 

  * What's needed from individuals?

>     * [ ] Typically, a detailed (but IP-safe, high-level) issue describing a user story or problem

Reviewer: Oh, I love the "IP-safe" delineation ... would love to take that and merge that into the FedID one ...

The purpose of Stage 1 proposals is to explore the Solution Space and evaluate multiple candidate solutions fairly.
This is where most of the work gets done because it involves exploring alternatives, understanding tradeoffs, gathering implementation experience, incubating alternatives, gathering evidence of demand and fitness for purpose, and finally, identifying the best out of the many alternatives.

**Great care** should be taken to avoid substantial technical/design discussions happening outside the "IPR" boundary of the Community Group members if normative status beyond stage 1 is desired;
further standardization MUST be rejected if "clean IPR" cannot be achieved (e.g. by post-facto IP grants from all substantial contributors).

  * What's needed from champions?
    * [ ] Public identification of one or more [champions](https://github.com/tc39/how-we-work/blob/main/champion.md)
    * [ ] An understanding of the problem space (need not be *deeply* technical)
    * [ ] Familiarity with prior art and related parallel work
  * What's asked of the **Community Group**?
    * [ ] The Community Group consensus that the problem is worth spending the Community Group’s time working on

>     * [ ] A home for incubating the proposal. Small decisions will incubate in tracking issues. If and when the champions are ready to more thoroughly document their proposal, the WG chairs will create a repo for the champions to develop a cohesive proposal (e.g., [example](https://github.com/swicg/activitypub-http-signature)). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * [ ] A home for incubating the proposal. Small features will incubate in issues. If and when the champions are ready to more thoroughly document their proposal, the WG chairs will create a repo for the champions to develop the feature or proposal (e.g., [example](https://github.com/swicg/activitypub-http-signature)). 
```

Revert from "small decisions" back to "small features" for reasons provided in today's Social CG call, and also revert "cohesive proposal" back to "feature", yet add "or proposal" since we do want to encourage incubation of both new features in existing specs and new proposal specs.

Reviewer 3: 👍 re reverting

Reviewer 3: Accepting Tantek's change request (reverting 'decisions' back to original 'features' wording), per the discussion on the CG call today.

## Stage 4: Publication or Re-publication (Working Group)

 The purpose of Stage 4 Proposals is to produce a new [W3C Recommendation](https://www.w3.org/policies/process/#RecsW3C) or a new minor or major version of a prior one.
 
  * What's needed from champions?
    * [ ] Sufficient [implementation experience](https://www.w3.org/policies/process/#implementation-experience)
    * [ ] Two or more independent and complete implementations
      * [ ] Implementation reports and corresponding conformance reports for each
  * What's asked of the **Working Group**?
    * [ ] Working Group consensus that the [Candidate Recommendation](https://www.w3.org/policies/process/#RecsCR)'s implementation experience is complete and
    * [ ] Working Group consensus to publish it as a [Proposed Recommendation](https://www.w3.org/policies/process/#RecsPR)

## Prior Art

* Social CG precedents:
  * Evan Promodorou's [ActivityPub/ActivityStreams-specific Vocabulary Extension Policy](https://swicg.github.io/extensions-policy/)
  * A. Schrijver [3-stage Standardization Process Proposal](https://socialhub.activitypub.rocks/t/3-stage-standards-process-guaranteeing-an-open-and-decentralized-ecosystem/3602)

>   * Indieweb [Living Standard](https://indieweb.org/specifications) Process (see [github discussion here](https://github.com/w3c/strategy/issues/435#issuecomment-1751403081))

Reviewer: Ha, these are great! I'm going to take a closer look at them too!! Thanks for noting!
